Key Git Concepts

Repository - A Folder where Git tracks your project and its history.
Clone - Make a copy of the remote repository on your compute
Stage - Tell Git which changes you want to save next.
Commit - Save a snapshot of your staged changes.
Branch - Work on different versions of features at the same time
Merge - Combine changes from different branches.
Pull - Get the latest changes from a remote repository
Push - Send your changes to a remote repository 

Set up name and email global in git:

git config --global user.name "Sample"
git config --global user.email "Sample@sample.com"

--global for every repo on your compute
--local (default) current repo


git config --list
git config user.name
git config user.email
git config code.editor

git config --global --unset user.name 
git config --global --unset user.email
git config --global --unset code.editor

Config Levels:

git config --system  (all users)
git config --global (current user)
git config --local (current repo)

Local settings only apply to the current repo - git config user.name "Project Name" 
Global settings apply to all repositories for the current user - git config --global user.name "Global Name"
System settings apply to all repositories for all users - git config --system user.name "System Name"

Initialize Git 

git init - git creats a hidden folder called .git inside your project 

what is repository?

a git repository is a folder that git tracks for changes, the repository stores all your projects history and versions.

ls -a - show hidden .git folder

ls - list files in the folder

pwd - to check the current directory

git status - check which files are tracked

what is a tracked file? 

a tracked file is a file that Git is watching for changes, to make a file tracked, you need to add it to the staging area.

what is the staging environment? 

the staging environment or staging area is like a waiting room for your changes.

you use it to tell git exactly which files you want to include in your next commit.

this gives you control over what goes into your project history.

git add <file> : stage file
git add --all or git add -A : stage all changes
git status : see what staged
git rm --cached <file> - unstage file

what is commit? 

A commit is like a save point in your project.

it records a snapshop of your files at a certain time, with a message describing what changed.

git commit -m "message" : commit staged changes with a message
git commit -a -m "message" : commit all tracked changes 
git log - see commit history
git commit (no -m)
git commit --allow-empty -m "Start project" : create an empty commity
git commit --no-edit : use previous commit message (no editor)
git commit --amend --no-edit : quickly add staged changes to last commit, keep message
git commit -m "message but forgot to git add a file, just add it commit again. or use commit --amend to add it your last commit
typo: git commit --ammend -m "corrected message" to fix the last commit message
accidentally commited the wrong files? 
git reset --soft HEAD~1 to undo the last commit and keep your changes staged

git log --oneline

git log --stat : to see which files chnaged in each commit

key commands for tagging

git tag <tagname>
git tag -a <tagname> -m "message" - create an annotated tag
git tag <tagname> <commit-hash> - tag a specific commit
git tag - List tags
git tag show <tagname> - show tag details

what is a tag?

a tag is git is like a label or bookmark for a specific commit

tags are most ofter used to mark important points in your project history, like releases (v1.0 or v2.0)

tags are simple and reliable way to keep track of versions and share them with your team or users.

common tag types

releases, miliestones, deployment, hotfixes

git tag v1.0

git tag -a v1.0 -m "version 1.0 release"

git show v1.0

push tags to remote ->  git push origin v1.0 / git push --tags

git push : does not push your tags 

delete tags: git tag -d v1.0

delete tags remotely:  git push origin --delete tag v1.0

update / replace a tag (force push) - if you need to move a tag to a different commit and update the remote, use --force

git tag -f v1.0 <new-commit-hash>

git push --force origin v1.0


git stash 

key commands for stashing

git stash - stash your changes
git stash push -m "message" - stash with a message
git stash list -list all stashes
git stash branch <branchname> - create a branch from a stash

what is git stash? why use it?

sometimes you need to quickly switch tasks or fix a bug, but youre not ready to commit your work

git stash lets you have your uncommitted changes and return to a clean working directory 

common use cases:

switch branches safely : save your work before changing branches
handle emergencies: stash your work to fix something urgent then restore it
keep you work-in-progress safe: avoid messy commits or losing changes

git stash 
tracked files - both stage and unstage are stashed by default
untracked files - new files not yet added to git are not stashed by default
to stash untracked files too, use git stash -u or --include-untracked

git stash push -m : add a message to remember what you stashed
git stash push -m "WIP: homepage redesign" 
git stash list 
git stash show : show latest stash

git stash show -p 

git stash apply - apply latest stash

git stash apply stash@{n} - restore a specific stash from the list

git stash pop - apply the latest stash and remove it from the stasck

git stash drop stash@{0}

git stash clear - clear 


Git History

What is Git History? 
Git keeps a detailed record of every change made to your project

You can use history commands to see what changed,when and who made the change

git log - show full commit history
git log --oneline - show a summary of commits
git show <commit> - show details of specific commit
git diff - see unstaged changes
git diff --staged - see staged changes

git diff <commit1> <commit2> - Compare two commits

git log --author="name"

in git log you use this '/' to search and q for quit


git log --since="2 weeks ago"

git log --stat - show files changed per commit

git log --graph see a simple graph of your branch history

git help <command> - see the manual page for a command
git <command> --help - see help for a command (same as a above)
git <command> -h see a quick summry of optios
git help --all list possible git commands
git help -g - list guides and concepts 

git add -h 

usage:git add [options] [--] ....
-n, --dry-run 
-v, --verbose
-i, -interactive : interactive picking
-p, --patch : select hunks interactively
-e, --edit : edit current diff and apply
-u, --update : updated tracked files
-A, --all add changes from all tracked and untracked files

What is a Git Branch?
In Git, a branch is like a separate workspace where you can make changes and try new dieas without affectingthe main project. 
Think of its a parallel universe for your code.

git branch <name>
git branch 
git checkout <name>

git add --all
git status
git commit -m "Message"

git add index.html
git commit -m "updated index.html with emergency fix"

git branch -d hello-world-images

rename a branch: git branch -m old-name new-name
list all branch: git branc
switch branch: git checkout branch-name or git switch branch-name
delete a branch (not merged) git branch -D branch-name
see which branch you're on : git status

What is Merging in Git?

Merging in Git means combinig the changes from one branch into another.

Common git merge options

git merge - merge a branch into your current branch
git merge --no-ff always create a merge commit
git merge --squash - combine changes into a single commit
git merge --abort - abort a merge in progress

Merging Branches (git merge)

To combine the changes from one branch into another, use git merge.

Usually, you first switch to the branch you want to merge into (often main or master), then run merge command with the branch name you want to combine in.

First, we need to change to the master branch:

git checkout master

git merge emergency-fix

git branch -d emergency-fix

Non-Fast-Forward Merge (git merge --no-diff)

By default, if your branch can be merged with a fast-forwad (no new commits on the base), Git just moves the branch pointer forward.

If you want to always create a merge commit (to keep history clearer), use git merge --no-ff branchname.

Squash Merge (git merge --squash)

if you want to combine all the changes from a branch into a single commit (instead of keeping every commit), use git merge --squash branchname.

This is useful for cleaning up commit history before merging.

git merge --squash feature-branch 

Aborting Merge a (git merge --abort)

if you run into trouble during a merge (like a conflict you don't want to resolve), you can cancel the merge and go back to how things were before with git merge --abort

git merge --abort

GIT WORKFLOW

Git Workflow Commands Overview

Working Directory - Where you make changes
git add - Stage changes
git commit - Save changes to your repository
git push - Share changes with others
git status - Check what's going on
Undo/Amend - Fix mistakes (git restore, git reset, git commit --amend)

Three Areas of Git

Working Directory: Where you make changes to your files
Staging Area (Index): Were you prepare changes before committing.
Repository: Where your committed history is stored.

Best Practices for Gif Workflow

Commit frequently with clear, meaning messages.
Check your status often with git status to avoid surprises.
Stage only what you intend to commit. Use gid add <file> for precision
Push regularly to back up your work and share with others.
Review your changes with git diff before committing

Git Pull from Github

Key Pull Commands

    • Fetch
    • Merge
    • Pull

Pull is Combination of 2 different Commands: Fetch & Merge

get fetch - downloads new data from a remote repository, but does not change your working files or branches, It lets you see what others have pushed before you merge or pull.

git fetch origin
    remote: Enumerating objects: 5, done.
    remote: Counting objects: 100% (5/5), done.
    remote: Compressing objects: 100% (3/3), done.
    remote: Total 3 (delta 2), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
    Unpacking objects: 100% (3/3), 733 bytes | 3.00 KiB/s, done.
    From https://github.com/w3schools-test/hello-world
    e0b6038..d29d69f  master     -> origin/master

git status
    On branch master
    Your branch is behind 'origin/master' by 1 commit, and can be fast-forwarded.
    (use "git pull" to update your local branch)

    nothing to commit, working tree clean

git log origin/master
    commit d29d69ffe2ee9e6df6fa0d313bb0592b50f3b853 (origin/master)
    Author: w3schools-test <77673807+w3schools-test@users.noreply.github.com>
    Date:   Fri Mar 26 14:59:14 2021 +0100

        Updated README.md with a line about GitHub

    commit e0b6038b1345e50aca8885d8fd322fc0e5765c3b (HEAD -> master)
    Merge: dfa79db 1f1584e
    Author: w3schools-test 
    Date:   Fri Mar 26 12:42:56 2021 +0100

        merged with hello-world-images after fixing conflicts

    ...
    ...